README.md, before:

# Experimental Tree Shaker

\[WIP\] This is an experimental tree shaker (code size optimizer) for JavaScript based on [the Oxc compiler](https://oxc.rs).

[**Try online**](https://kermanx.github.io/tree-shaker/)

## Features

- Simulate the runtime behavior of the code, instead of applying rules.
- Single AST pass - Analyzer as much information as possible.
- As accurate as possible. [test262](https://github.com/tc39/test262) is used for testing.
- May not be the fastest. (But I will try my best)

## Examples

### Constant Folding

> This is a simple example, but it's a good start.

<table><tbody><tr><td width="500px"> Input </td><td width="500px"> Output </td></tr><tr>
<td valign="top">

```js
export function f() {
  function g(a) {
    if (a) console.log("effect");
    else return "str";
  }
  let { ["x"]: y = 1 } = { x: g("") ? undefined : g(1) };
  return y;
}
```

</td><td valign="top">

```js
export function f() {
  return 1;
}
```

</td></tr></tbody></table>

### Remove Dead Code

> The core of tree-shaking. The execution is simulated to know which code is useless.
>
> And don't worry about the `&& true` in the output, minifier will remove it.

<table><tbody><tr><td width="500px"> Input </td><td width="500px"> Output </td></tr><tr>
<td valign="top">

```js
function f(value) {
  if (value) console.log(`${value} is truthy`);
}
f(1);
f(0);

function g(t1, t2) {
  if (t1 && t2) console.log(2);
  else if (t1 || t2) console.log(1);
  else console.log(0);
}
g(true, true);
g(false, false);
```

</td><td valign="top">

```js
function f() {
  {
    console.log("1 is truthy");
  }
}
f();

function g(t1) {
  if (t1 && true) console.log(2);
  else {
    console.log(0);
  }
}
g(true);
g(false);
```

</td></tr></tbody></table>

### Object Property Mangling

> This is beyond the scope of tree-shaking, we need a new name for this project 😇.

<table><tbody><tr><td width="500px"> Input </td><td width="500px"> Output </td></tr><tr>
<td valign="top">

```js
export function main() {
  const obj = {
    foo: v1,
    [t1 ? "bar" : "baz"]: v2,
  };
  const key = t2 ? "foo" : "bar";
  console.log(obj[key]);
}
```

</td><td valign="top">

```js
export function main() {
  const obj = {
    a: v1,
    [t1 ? "b" : "c"]: v2,
  };
  const key = t2 ? "a" : "b";
  console.log(obj[key]);
}
```

</td></tr></tbody></table>

### JSX

> `createElement` also works, if it is directly imported from `react`.

<table><tbody><tr><td width="500px"> Input </td><td width="500px"> Output </td></tr><tr>
<td valign="top">

```jsx
function Name({ name, info }) {
  return (
    <span>
      {name}
      {info && <sub> Lots of things never rendered </sub>}
    </span>
  );
}
export function Main() {
  return <Name name={"world"} />;
}
```

</td><td valign="top">

```jsx
function Name() {
  return (
    <span>
      {"world"}
      {}
    </span>
  );
}
export function Main() {
  return <Name />;
}
```

</td></tr></tbody></table>

### React.js

> We also have special handling for some React.js APIs. For example, React Context, `memo`, `forwardRef`, `useMemo`, etc.

<table><tbody><tr><td width="500px"> Input </td><td width="500px"> Output </td></tr><tr>
<td valign="top">

```jsx
import React from "react";
const MyContext = React.createContext("default");
function Inner() {
  const value = React.useContext(MyContext);
  return <div>{value}</div>;
}
export function main() {
  return (
    <MyContext.Provider value="hello">
      <Inner />
    </MyContext.Provider>
  );
}
```

</td><td valign="top">

```jsx
import React from "react";
const MyContext = React.createContext();
function Inner() {
  return <div>{"hello"}</div>;
}
export function main() {
  return (
    <MyContext.Provider>
      <Inner />
    </MyContext.Provider>
  );
}
```

</td></tr></tbody></table>

## Comparison

- **Rollup**: Rollup tree-shakes the code in a multi-module context, while this project is focused on a single module. For some cases, this project can remove 10% more code than Rollup.
- **Closure Compiler**: Closure Compiler can be considered as a tree shaker + minifier, while this project is only a tree shaker (for the minifier, we have `oxc_minifier`). Theoretically, we can shake more than Closure Compiler, but we cannot compare them directly because we don't have a equivalent minifier. Also, it's written in Java, which is hard to be integrated into the JS ecosystem.
- **swc**: swc can also be considered as a tree shaker + minifier. TBH, currently swc is much faster and more complete. It is rule-based, which is a different approach from this project. It's also not compatible with the Oxc project, thus a new tree shaker is needed.

## Todo

- Performance!
- Type narrowing
- Pure annotation
- Complete JS Builtins metadata
- Test against fixtures from other tree shakers like Rollup
- Rollup-like try-scope optimization/de-optimization
- Reuse code with oxc_minifier for JS computation logics

## Basic Approach

1. Parse the code via `oxc_parser`.
2. Build the semantic information via `oxc_semantic`.
3. Tree shake the code.
   - Emulate the runtime behavior of the code. (Control flow, Side effects, ...)
   - Analyze the possible runtime values of the variables.
   - Remove the dead code.
4. Minify the code via `oxc_minifier`. (Optional)

### Concepts

- `Entity`: Represents the analyzed information of a JS value.
- `Consumable`: Entity or AST Nodes or some other things that the runtime value of `Entity` depends on.
- Scopes:
  - Call Scope: Function call scope.
  - Cf Scope: Control flow scope.
  - Variable Scope: Variable scope.
  - Try Scope: Try statement or function.

## Soundiness Statement

This project has been done in the spirit of soundiness. When building practical program analyses, it is often necessary to cut corners. In order to be open about language features that we do not support or support only partially, we are attaching this soundiness statement.

Our analysis does not have a fully sound handling of the following features:

- eval
- implicit conversions (==, valueOf, toString)
- exceptions and flow related to that
- prototype semantics

We have determined that the unsoundness in our handling of these features has minimal effect on analysis output and the validity of our experimental evaluation. To the best of our knowledge, our analysis has a sound handling of all language features other than those listed above.

This statement has been produced with the Soundiness Statement Generator from http://soundiness.org.

Commit message:

docs: add docs about running locally

README.md, after:

# Experimental Tree Shaker

\[WIP\] This is an experimental tree shaker (code size optimizer) for JavaScript based on [the Oxc compiler](https://oxc.rs).

[**Try online**](https://kermanx.github.io/tree-shaker/) | [**Run locally**](#run-locally)

## Features

- Simulate the runtime behavior of the code, instead of applying rules.
- Single AST pass - Analyzer as much information as possible.
- As accurate as possible. [test262](https://github.com/tc39/test262) is used for testing.
- May not be the fastest. (But I will try my best)

## Examples

### Constant Folding

> This is a simple example, but it's a good start.

<table><tbody><tr><td width="500px"> Input </td><td width="500px"> Output </td></tr><tr>
<td valign="top">

```js
export function f() {
  function g(a) {
    if (a) console.log("effect");
    else return "str";
  }
  let { ["x"]: y = 1 } = { x: g("") ? undefined : g(1) };
  return y;
}
```

</td><td valign="top">

```js
export function f() {
  return 1;
}
```

</td></tr></tbody></table>

### Remove Dead Code

> The core of tree-shaking. The execution is simulated to know which code is useless.
>
> And don't worry about the `&& true` in the output, minifier will remove it.

<table><tbody><tr><td width="500px"> Input </td><td width="500px"> Output </td></tr><tr>
<td valign="top">

```js
function f(value) {
  if (value) console.log(`${value} is truthy`);
}
f(1);
f(0);

function g(t1, t2) {
  if (t1 && t2) console.log(2);
  else if (t1 || t2) console.log(1);
  else console.log(0);
}
g(true, true);
g(false, false);
```

</td><td valign="top">

```js
function f() {
  {
    console.log("1 is truthy");
  }
}
f();

function g(t1) {
  if (t1 && true) console.log(2);
  else {
    console.log(0);
  }
}
g(true);
g(false);
```

</td></tr></tbody></table>

### Object Property Mangling

> This is beyond the scope of tree-shaking, we need a new name for this project 😇.

<table><tbody><tr><td width="500px"> Input </td><td width="500px"> Output </td></tr><tr>
<td valign="top">

```js
export function main() {
  const obj = {
    foo: v1,
    [t1 ? "bar" : "baz"]: v2,
  };
  const key = t2 ? "foo" : "bar";
  console.log(obj[key]);
}
```

</td><td valign="top">

```js
export function main() {
  const obj = {
    a: v1,
    [t1 ? "b" : "c"]: v2,
  };
  const key = t2 ? "a" : "b";
  console.log(obj[key]);
}
```

</td></tr></tbody></table>

### JSX

> `createElement` also works, if it is directly imported from `react`.

<table><tbody><tr><td width="500px"> Input </td><td width="500px"> Output </td></tr><tr>
<td valign="top">

```jsx
function Name({ name, info }) {
  return (
    <span>
      {name}
      {info && <sub> Lots of things never rendered </sub>}
    </span>
  );
}
export function Main() {
  return <Name name={"world"} />;
}
```

</td><td valign="top">

```jsx
function Name() {
  return (
    <span>
      {"world"}
      {}
    </span>
  );
}
export function Main() {
  return <Name />;
}
```

</td></tr></tbody></table>

### React.js

> We also have special handling for some React.js APIs. For example, React Context, `memo`, `forwardRef`, `useMemo`, etc.

<table><tbody><tr><td width="500px"> Input </td><td width="500px"> Output </td></tr><tr>
<td valign="top">

```jsx
import React from "react";
const MyContext = React.createContext("default");
function Inner() {
  const value = React.useContext(MyContext);
  return <div>{value}</div>;
}
export function main() {
  return (
    <MyContext.Provider value="hello">
      <Inner />
    </MyContext.Provider>
  );
}
```

</td><td valign="top">

```jsx
import React from "react";
const MyContext = React.createContext();
function Inner() {
  return <div>{"hello"}</div>;
}
export function main() {
  return (
    <MyContext.Provider>
      <Inner />
    </MyContext.Provider>
  );
}
```

</td></tr></tbody></table>

## Comparison

- **Rollup**: Rollup tree-shakes the code in a multi-module context, while this project is focused on a single module. For some cases, this project can remove 10% more code than Rollup.
- **Closure Compiler**: Closure Compiler can be considered as a tree shaker + minifier, while this project is only a tree shaker (for the minifier, we have `oxc_minifier`). Theoretically, we can shake more than Closure Compiler, but we cannot compare them directly because we don't have a equivalent minifier. Also, it's written in Java, which is hard to be integrated into the JS ecosystem.
- **swc**: swc can also be considered as a tree shaker + minifier. TBH, currently swc is much faster and more complete. It is rule-based, which is a different approach from this project. It's also not compatible with the Oxc project, thus a new tree shaker is needed.

## Todo

- Performance!
- Type narrowing
- Pure annotation
- Complete JS Builtins metadata
- Test against fixtures from other tree shakers like Rollup
- Rollup-like try-scope optimization/de-optimization
- Reuse code with oxc_minifier for JS computation logics

## Basic Approach

1. Parse the code via `oxc_parser`.
2. Build the semantic information via `oxc_semantic`.
3. Tree shake the code.
   - Emulate the runtime behavior of the code. (Control flow, Side effects, ...)
   - Analyze the possible runtime values of the variables.
   - Remove the dead code.
4. Minify the code via `oxc_minifier`. (Optional)

### Concepts

- `Entity`: Represents the analyzed information of a JS value.
- `Consumable`: Entity or AST Nodes or some other things that the runtime value of `Entity` depends on.
- Scopes:
  - Call Scope: Function call scope.
  - Cf Scope: Control flow scope.
  - Variable Scope: Variable scope.
  - Try Scope: Try statement or function.

## Run Locally

1. Clone the repo.
2. Run `cargo run ./path/to/bundled.js`
3. The output files will be in `./output/...`
4. (Optional) You can open the optimized file in VSCode and run the Open Diff command from the "Auto Diff Opener" extension to see the diff.

Note that Rollup is recommended for bundling, because it has information about the side effects of the modules, and it produces much cleaner bundles.

If you encounter any problems, please open an issue with the minimal reproduction. Thanks!

## Soundiness Statement

This project has been done in the spirit of soundiness. When building practical program analyses, it is often necessary to cut corners. In order to be open about language features that we do not support or support only partially, we are attaching this soundiness statement.

Our analysis does not have a fully sound handling of the following features:

- eval
- implicit conversions (==, valueOf, toString)
- exceptions and flow related to that
- prototype semantics

We have determined that the unsoundness in our handling of these features has minimal effect on analysis output and the validity of our experimental evaluation. To the best of our knowledge, our analysis has a sound handling of all language features other than those listed above.

This statement has been produced with the Soundiness Statement Generator from http://soundiness.org.
